CHAPTER XXXVI of the Holy Bible, King James Version.
Then wrought Bezalel and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whom the Lord put wisdom
and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary,
according to all that the Lord had commanded.
And Moses called Bezalel and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whose heart the
Lord had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work
to do it.
And they received of Moses all the offering which the children of Israel had brought for
the work of the service of the sanctuary to make it withal.
And they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.
And all the wise men that wrought all the work of the sanctuary came every man from
his work which they made.
And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service
of the work which the Lord commanded to make.
And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the cap, saying,
Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary.
So the people were restrained from bringing, for the stuff they had was sufficient for
all the work to make it, and too much.
And every wise-hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten
curtains of fine twine linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubims of cunning
work made he them.
The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four
The curtains were all of one size.
And he coupled the five curtains one unto another, and the other five curtains he coupled
one unto another.
And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling,
likewise he made in the uttermost side of another curtain in the coupling of the second.
Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain which
was in the coupling of the second, the loops held one curtain to another.
And he made fifty tashes of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the tashes,
so it became one tabernacle.
And he made curtains of goat's hair for the tent over the tabernacle, eleven curtains
he made them.
The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one curtain,
the eleven curtains were of one size.
And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.
And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty
loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
And he made fifty tashes of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
And he made a covering for the tent of ram's skins dyed red, and a covering of badger's
skins above that.
And he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up.
The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.
One board had two tenons equally distant one from another, thus did he make for all the
boards of the tabernacle.
And he made boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards for the south side southward, and forty
sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards, two sockets under one board for his
two tenons and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
And for the other side of the tabernacle which is toward the north corner, he made twenty
boards, and their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under one board and two sockets
under another board.
And for the sides of the tabernacle westward, he made six boards.
and two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides, and they
were coupled beneath and coupled together at the head thereof to one ring, thus he did
to both of them in both the corners. And there were eight boards, and their sockets were
sixteen sockets of silver under every board two sockets. And he made bars of shittim wood,
five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of
the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for
the sides westward. And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one
end to the other. And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold to
be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold. And he made a veil of blue and
purple and scarlet and fine twined linen, with cherubims made he it of cunning work.
And he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold, their hooks
were of gold, and he cast for them four sockets of silver. And he made an hanging for the
tabernacle door of blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen of needlework, and the
five pillars of it with their hooks, and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets
with gold, but their five sockets were of brass.
Chapter 37 And Bezalil made the ark of shittim wood. Two cubits and a half was the length
of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of
it. And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it
round about. And he cast for it four rings of gold to be set by the four corners of it,
even two rings upon the one side of it and two rings upon the other side of it. And he
made staves of shittim wood and overlaid them with gold, and he put the staves into the
rings by the sides of the ark to bear the ark. And he made the mercy seat of pure gold,
two cubits and a half was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two
ends of the mercy seat, one cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the
other end on that side, how to the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
And the cherubims spread out their wings on high and covered with their wings over the
mercy seat with their faces one to another, even to the mercy seatward were the faces
of the cherubims. And he made the table of shittim wood, two cubits was the length thereof,
and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof. And he overlaid
it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about. Also he made thereunto
a border of an hand breadth round about, and made a crown of gold for the border thereof
round about. And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners
that were in the four feet thereof. Over against the border were the rings, the places
for the staves to bear the table. And he made the staves of shittim wood and overlaid them
with gold to bear the table. And he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes
and his spoons and his bowls and his covers to cover with all, of pure gold. And he made
the candlestick of pure gold, of beaten work made he the candlestick, his shaft and his
branch, his bowls, his knops and his flowers, were of the same. And six branches going out
of the sides thereof, three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and
three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof. Three bowls made after
the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower. And three bowls made like almonds
in another branch, a knop and a flower. So throughout the six branches going out of the
candlestick. And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops and his
flowers. And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of
the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going
out of it. Their knops and their branches were of the same. All of it was one beaten
work of pure gold. And he made his seven lamps and his snuffers and his snuff-dishes of pure
gold. Of a talent of pure gold made he at all the vessels thereof. And he made the incense
altar of shittim wood. The length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit. It
was four square, and two cubits was the height of it. The horns thereof were of the same.
And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it and the sides thereof round about,
and the horns of it. Also he made unto it a crown of gold round about. And he made two
rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides
thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal. And he made the staves of shittim
wood and overlaid them with gold. And he made the holy anointing oil and the pure incense
of sweet spices according to the work of the apothecary.
Chapter 38 And he made the altar of burnt offering of
shittim wood. Five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof. It was
four square, and three cubits the height thereof. And he made the horns thereof on the four
corners of it. The horns thereof were of the same. And he overlaid it with brass. And he
made all the vessels of the altar, the pots and the shovels and the basins and the flesh
hooks and the firepans, all the vessels thereof made he of brass. And he made for the altar
a brazen grate of net work under the compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it. And
he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass to be places for the staves.
And he made the staves of shittim wood and overlaid them with brass. And he put the staves
into the rings on the sides of the altar to bear it withal. He made the altar hollow with
boards. And he made the laver of brass and the foot of it of brass of the looking-glasses
of the women assembling which assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And he made the court. On the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twine
linen and a hundred cubits. Their pillars were 20 and their brazen sockets 20. The hooks
of the pillars and their fillets were of silver. And for the north side the hangings were a
hundred cubits. Their pillars were 20 and their sockets of brass 20. The hooks of the
pillars and their fillets of silver. And for the west side were hangings of 50 cubits,
their pillars ten, and their sockets ten, the hooks of the pillars and their fillets
of silver, and for the east side eastward fifty cubits. The hangings of the one side
of the gate were fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three, and for the
other side of the court gate on this hand and on that hand were hangings of fifteen
cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three. All the hangings of the court round
about were of fine twined linen, and the sockets for the pillars were of brass, the hooks of
the pillars and their fillets of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters of silver,
and all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver. And the hanging for the gate
of the court was needlework of blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen, and twenty
cubits was the length, and the height and the breadth was five cubits answerable to
the hangings of the court. And their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four,
their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets of silver.
And all the pins of the tabernacle and of the court round about were of brass.
This is the sum of the tabernacle even of the tabernacle of testimony as it was counted
according to the commandment of Moses for the service of the Levites by the hand of
son to Aaron the priest. And Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Her, of the tribe of Judah,
made all that the Lord commanded Moses. And with him was a holy Ab, son of Ahisamach,
of the tribe of Dan, an engraver and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue and in
purple and in scarlet and fine linen. All the gold that was occupied for the work and
all the work of the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents
and seven hundred and thirty shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary. And the silver
of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents and a thousand seven
hundred and three score and fifteen shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary. A becca
for every man, that is, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one
that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand
and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men. And of the hundred talents of silver
were cast the sockets of the sanctuary and the sockets of the veil, and hundred sockets
of the hundred talents a talent for a socket. And of the thousand seven hundred seventy
and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars and overlaid their chapiters and filleted
them. And the brass of the offering was seventy talents and two thousand and four hundred
shekels. And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation
and the brazen altar and the brazen grate for it and all the vessels of the altar, and
the sockets of the court round about and the sockets of the court-gate and all the pins
of the tabernacle and all the pins of the court round about.
CHAPTER XXXIX And of the blue and purple and scarlet they
made cloths of service to do service in the holy place and made the holy garments for
Aaron as the Lord commanded Moses. And he made the ephod of gold, blue and purple and
scarlet and fine twined linen. And they did beat the gold into thin plates and cut it
into wires to work it in the blue and in the purple and in the scarlet and in the fine
linen with cunning work. They made shoulder-pieces for it to couple it together, by the two edges
was it coupled together. And the curious girdle of his ephod that was upon it was of the same,
according to the work thereof, of gold, blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen
as the Lord commanded Moses. And they wrought onyx stones enclosed in ooshes of gold graven
as signets are graven with the names of the children of Israel. And he put them on the
shoulders of the ephod that they should be stones for a memorial to the children of Israel
as the Lord commanded Moses. And he made the breast-plate of cunning work like the work
of the ephod of gold, blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen. It was four
square they made the breast-plate double, a span was the length thereof and a span the
length thereof being doubled. And they set in at four rows of stones. The first row was
a sardius, a topaz and a carbuncle. This was the first row. And the second row an emerald,
a sapphire and a diamond. And the third row a ligure, an agate and an amethyst. And the
fourth row a burl, an onyx and a jasper. They were enclosed in ooshes of gold in their enclosings.
And the stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according
to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the
twelve tribes. And they made upon the breast-plate chains at the ends of wreathen work of pure
gold. And they made two ooshes of gold and two gold rings and put the two rings in the
two ends of the breast-plate. And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two
rings on the ends of the breast-plate. And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they
fastened in the two ooshes and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod before it.
And they made two rings of gold and put them on the two ends of the breast-plate upon the
border of it which was on the side of the ephod inward. And they made two other golden
rings and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath toward the fore-part of it
over against the other coupling thereof above the curious girdle of the ephod. And they
did bind the breast-plate by his rings under the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue
that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod and that the breast-plate might
not be loosed from the ephod as the Lord commanded Moses. And he made the robe of the ephod of
woven work all of blue. And there was a hole in the midst of the robe as the hole of an
ephod was a virgin with a band round about the hole that it should not rend. And they
made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue and purple and scarlet and twined
linen. And they made bells of pure gold and put the bells between the pomegranates upon
the hem of the robe round about between the pomegranates, a bell and a pomegranate, a
bell and a pomegranate round about the hem of the robe to minister in as the Lord commanded
Moses. And they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron and for his sons and
a mitre of fine linen and goodly bonnets of fine linen and linen breeches of fine twined
linen and a girdle of fine twined linen and blue and purple and scarlet of needlework
as the Lord commanded Moses. And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold and
wrote upon it a writing like to the engravings of a signet, Holiness to the Lord. And they
tied unto it a lace of blue to fasten it on high upon the mitre as the Lord commanded
Moses. Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished and
the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.
And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent and all his furniture, his tashes,
his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets. And the covering of ram skins
dyed red, and the covering of badger's skins, and the veil of the covering, the ark of the
testimony and the staves thereof and the mercy seat, the table and all the vessels thereof
and the showbread, the pure candlestick with the lamps thereof even with the lamps to be
set in order and all the vessels thereof and the oil for light and the golden altar and
the anointing oil and the sweet incense and the hanging for the tabernacle door, the brazen
altar and his grate of brass, his staves and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, the
hangings of the court, his pillars and his sockets, and the hanging for the court-gate,
his cords and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle for the tent
of the congregation, the cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy
garments for Aaron the priest and his son's garments to minister in the priest's office.
According to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work.
And Moses did look upon all the work, and behold, they had done it as the Lord had commanded.
Even so had they done it, and Moses blessed them.
CHAPTER XL
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, On the first day of the first month shalt thou
set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and thou shalt put therein the ark of the
testimony and cover the ark with a veil, and thou shalt bring in the table and set in order
the things that are to be set in order upon it, and thou shalt bring in the candlestick
and light the lamps thereof, and thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before
the ark of the testimony and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle, and thou shalt
set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of
the congregation, and thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and
the altar and shalt put water therein, and thou shalt set up the court round about and
hang up the hanging at the court gate, and thou shalt take the anointing oil and anoint
the tabernacle and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it and all the vessels thereof,
and it shall be holy, and thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering and all his
vessels and sanctify the altar, and it shall be an altar most holy, and thou shalt anoint
the laver and his foot and sanctify it, and thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation and wash them with water, and thou shalt put
upon Aaron the holy garments and anoint him and sanctify him that he may minister unto
me in the priest's office, and thou shalt bring his sons and clothe them with coats,
and thou shalt anoint them as thou didst anoint their father that they may minister unto me
in the priest's office, for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood
throughout their generations. Thus did Moses, according to all that the Lord commanded him,
so did he.
And it came to pass in the first month and the second year on the first day of the month
that the tabernacle was reared up, and Moses reared up the tabernacle and fastened his
sockets and set up the boards thereof and put in the bars thereof and reared up his
pillars, and he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle and put the covering of the
tent above upon it as the Lord commanded Moses, and he took and put the testimony into
the ark and set the staves on the ark and put the mercy seat above upon the ark, and
he brought the ark into the tabernacle and set up the veil of the covering and covered
the ark of the testimony as the Lord commanded Moses, and he put the table in the tent of
the congregation upon the side of the tabernacle northward without the veil, and he set the
bed in order upon it before the Lord as the Lord had commanded Moses, and he put the candlestick
in the tent of the congregation over against the table on the side of the tabernacle southward,
and he lighted the lamps before the Lord as the Lord commanded Moses, and he put the golden
altar in the tent of the congregation before the veil, and he burnt sweet incense thereon
commanded Moses, and he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle, and he put
the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation
and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering as the Lord commanded Moses,
and he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar and put water there
to wash withal, and Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat
when they went into the tent of the congregation and when they came near under the altar they
washed as the Lord commanded Moses, and he reared up the court round about the tabernacle
and the altar and set up the hanging of the court gate, so Moses finished the work. Then
a cloud covered the tent of the congregation and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle,
and Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation because the cloud abode
thereon and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle, and when the cloud was taken
up from over the tabernacle the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys,
but if the cloud were not taken up then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken
up, for the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day and fire was on it by night
in the sight of all the house of Israel throughout all their journeys.